Title: ยง 46.2-819.6. Invoice for unpaid toll.
Content:
A. The operator of a toll facility shall send an invoice for the unpaid toll pursuant to subsection C to the registered owner of the vehicle. An invoice for the unpaid toll shall contain the following:
1. The name and address of the registered owner alleged to be liable under this section;
2. The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in such violation or information obtained from an automatic vehicle identification system if the vehicle is identified by an automatic vehicle identification system for the purpose of violation detection;
3. The location where such violation took place;
4. The date and time of such violation;
5. The amount of the toll not paid;
6. The amount of the administrative fee;
7. The date by which the toll and administrative fee must be paid;
8. The statutory defenses available under this chapter, including a notice of (i) the summoned person's ability to provide the name and address of the vehicle operator at the time of the violation through the filing of an affidavit as provided in ยง 33.2-503, 46.2-819.1, or 46.2-819.3:1 and (ii) instructions for filing such affidavit, including the address to which the affidavit is to be sent;
9. A warning describing the penalties for nonpayment of the invoice for the unpaid toll or failure to file a notice to contest liability for the unpaid toll; and
10. The procedures and time limits for filing a notice to contest liability for an unpaid toll as provided in subsection C of ยง 46.2-819.3:1.
B. The toll facility operator shall include with the invoice a form to be used by the registered owner or operator of the vehicle to contest liability for an unpaid toll. This form shall include the mailing address to which it should be sent.
C. Whenever an invoice for an unpaid toll is to be provided to any person by the toll facility operator, it may be executed by mailing by first-class mail a copy of the invoice to the address of the owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the Department.
2011, c. 736; 2016, c. 753.
